---
title: Dying Note
categories:
- essays
- english
date: "2022-08-31T08:38:00+07:00"
tags:
- philosophy
---

Since there is no existing term for the thing that I'm writing here, I
will invent one, which is "dying note". It is not a suicide note,
because even though I think suicide is always a possibility and a matter
of choice, currently I have no intention to do so.

Why am I writing a dying note, when I'm feeling like I am at the height
of my youth, my strength and in the constant process of growing my
intellect? Because while I'm optimistic about the future, the future is
still the future, full of uncertainty. And while being optimistic, I'm
also realistic. Therefore, I think it is necessary to account for the
full range of possibility, including the possibility that I might die
for some reason in the near future. Only a single-minded fool thinks
death from old age is the only death awaiting him.

I had written a dying note back in 2020. Even though the spirit and the
idea are still the same, there is some superfluous part in the previous
note that makes me want to write this one to correct it. So, let's talk
about that superfluous part first. I believe I spent like half of the
previous note talking about what should be done at my funeral. Back then
I have the idea of integrity of my life and ideology, so the funeral
should be thing that extend it and finalize it. But then I read
Montaigne, who talked about the vanity of people arranging things that
happen after they die. Indeed, what I was trying to do is vanity. Why
should I care about what happens after my death? Here I am, trying my
best to live well, to make sense of the limited time I have. What
matters is what belongs to this life, what I am capable of thinking
about. After I die, I can't think and can't feel anything. Why should I
care?

But wait, isn't writing a dying note an attempt at integrity, trying to
leave something behind? Maybe. But for the sake of consistency, let's
just think that I am writing to myself. This note is just an attempt of
me trying to make sense of my life, to state explicitly what is
important to me, what keeps me going forward. The people who understand
me don't need to read it, because there is nothing that I have to
explain to them. Those who don't understand me or don't know me don't
matter. I never give a fuck about what they think about me, alive or
dead.

Before focusing on what is the core, what I believe to be unchanging in
me, let's talk about the changes, internal and external, that happen in
the past 2 years. I learned a lot about software engineering and other
subjects. I gained a better understanding of myself, physically and
mentally, and of the world around me. I moved to Singapore, had the
chance to work in a different country and a somewhat different culture.
I made some new friends, had a lot of insightful conversations. And I
had time to think, to dig deeper and to explore the possibilities.

So, what is the unchanging part? It is the thing that motivates me, that
drives all these exploration and learning. I have always felt it and
aimed for it, but only recently, after having a conversation with Tuan,
I could identify it and call it by name. It is freedom. It is not only
that, instinctually, or biologically, I have always had a taste for
freedom. But rationally, I think it is the only thing that is worth
pursuing as a human being, capable of thinking and making decision. By
freedom, I don't mean the vulgar, simple meaning the word that is common
in cultures plague with capitalism and consumerism: freedom to pursue
the things that we want. I mean freedom in a higher sense: freedom to
choose the things that we want to pursue. Why? Because if we don't think
about what is meaningful, what is desirable, what is worth pursuing,
then the world around us or the biological part inside us will provide
us the carrot and stick, either telling us explicitly or influencing us
in an unconscious way regarding what we should want. Then we are just
tossed about, doing whatever is convenient for the influencers, and
there is no fucking freedom in any of that.

So, having talked about the goal, what is the mean? The only mean is
knowledge. By knowledge, I mean a broader sense of the word, which
includes experience. By gaining more knowledge and experience, I can
know what the possibilities are, the range of things that I can want.
Then I can compare the tradeoffs between those options, and finally
choose the one that is most desirable, well, at that current state of my
knowledge. Therefore, what I had done and what I will keep doing is
learning and experiencing the possibilities.

Of course, I must accept my limitations, which include my limited mental
capacity, my limited time on earth and all the other biological needs
that have to be satisfied so I myself can function normally. But those
limitations are also motivations. Why would I want to do anything if my
power and time are unlimited? There is no need to try, there is no
urgency in such a situation. And, having accepted that my time is
limited, the way that I must learn is clear: I will do it in the most
efficient way, trying to gain as much knowledge and experience as I can.
In the process, I have to leave something behind, and have no time to
regret it. But it doesn't matter. The same way as the unachievability of
absolute knowledge and freedom doesn't matters. The only thing that
matters is that I can come closer to it, that I know I always try to do
it, and that every day I can sense my progress towards it.

I will conclude this note here. I think I have said enough, and surely
more than what I planned to write. But the topic is by no mean simple
and I think it deserves to be treated at sufficient length. To
summarize, freedom is what I want, gaining knowledge is how I can
achieve it, and accepting my limitations and trying my best is how I do
it.

*Some contexts about the time of this writing, in case it is of interest
later to me: I have just finished my last interview with Amazon
recently. I don't know about the result yet, but I have tried my best
over the past 5 months, learned a lot during the process, and I'm
satisfied with myself.*
