---
title: On precision of words
categories:
- essays
- english
date: "2021-05-27T21:43:00+07:00"
tags:
- philosophy
---

Informal statements are often imprecise. Consider these two statements:
"I have just finished dinner" and "I will always love you". Both are
imprecise. Why? Because both are certain about one thing, and leave out
many possibilities. My memory is imperfect. My feeling could deceive me.
I might have thought about yesterday experience while in fact haven't
had today's dinner yet. My feeling of full in my stomach could be caused
by the water I drank. But these possibilities are very unlikely,
consider I'm of a sound mind and I'm usually able to distinguish between
the feeling of full caused by food and that caused by water.

So, what would be the precise statements? Of those two mentioned, the
precise ones can be: "I'm quite certain (there is a high probability)
that I have just finished dinner" and "There is a chance that I will
always love you". About recent past event, I'm quite sure. About distant
past event, I'm less certain. The same is about the future. So,
considering the chance that "I will always love you", if I ever say that
to my future lover, I think it is quite low. Why? No matter how much I
know about myself and no matter how confident I am in my love, there
many things outside of my control. I can't control what my lover thinks
and how she may change in the future. I can't control external
circumstances, the development of future technologies, some of which may
radically affect me, my lover or our relationship. For normal people,
illness, family issues and change of place or job could be enough of a
reason for a change of mind. Even if I'm confident that I won't be
affected by these factors, there are many unknown possibilities which I
haven't thought of. What if she merges her consciousness with a computer
and becomes a totally different person (or thing), who perceives the
world in a totally unimaginable way? What if we can control aging and be
young forever? Or maybe just slow down the aging process, so both can
live 500 years? Don't think it is too far-fetched. I'm sure most lovers
50 years ago would not able to imagine that today lovers can live
thousand miles apart and communicate mainly via a network of computers
called the Internet.

Therefore, statements about the future, especially about things outside
of our control, should be given carefully or taken less seriously.
However, in normal situations, optimistic/approximate statements are
usually acceptable, for 2 reasons. First, because the informal context
doesn't require precision, and precise statements are lengthy and even
ridiculous ("Will you visit me tomorrow?" "There is a high probability
that I will, considering that currently I'm of good health and there is
a low probability of traffic accident"). Second, optimistic statements
say something about the believe and commitment of the speaker. "I will
always love you" could mean "I will try my best to be reliable, to love
you as I currently do" or "I believe that my love for you will last".
Thus, it is totally okay to make such statements in normal
circumstances. Yet it is another thing to believe literally what those
mean. The latter is called blindness and stupidity. Well, you can say "I
know all that, but I prefer to be blind and stupid and follow my emotion
and impulse". I can accept that, as long as you realize you are being
irrational. But there are people who don't even know that they are being
stupid and irrational. There is one who even blamed me for being
unreliable when I refused to make precise statement regarding what I
would do and where I would be after 5 years. Thinking about those always
makes me marvel at the limitless of human ignorance.
